okay good morning everyone let's Dive
Right Back In we are making our way
through the 10 assignments that will set
you up for your final project just to
orient the undergrads and graduates as
to where you are and where you're
going as we're setting up our
evolutionary algor our evolutionary
robotics experimental platform you're
working your way through at the moment
putting together all the bits and pieces
that make up your simul ated robot
running around in its virtual
environment the robot itself is made up
of physical objects called links uh you
just finished the assignment on joints
which are the invisible objects in the
physics engine that connect pairs of
links together that was assignment three
uh a few of you pointed out a few things
that were a little bit confusing about
joints I'll come back in a moment to
just refresh and reinforce some of those
Concepts undergraduates in assignment
four uh which you're going to be working
on this week you're going to be leaving
the physics engine behind in the sense
that you're going to now start to add on
some additional bits and pieces that are
simulated inside the physics engine that
the physics engine itself doesn't really
deal with so everything above this line
just sort of comes default with the
physics engine in order to simulate a
robot in a physics engine you're going
to have to simulate some addition things
inside that physics engine such as the
sensors Which pull information in for
the robot from its virtual environment
in assignment four you're going to be
working with two python packages numpy
and matplot lib who's familiar with both
of those pretty much everybody okay if
you're not or it's been a little while
since you've used numpy or numerical uh
numerical methods for python spend some
time time refamiliarizing yourself with
numpy this week matplot lib uh it's been
around for a long time it's not ideal
but it is sort of the gold standard in
most science and engineering projects
for visualizing data you're going to be
using matplot lib in assignment 4 to
visualize the incoming sensory
information to your robot so again if
you haven't used matplot lib before or
it's been a while re familiarize
yourself with mat plot lib we're going
to be making very heavy use of numpy and
matplot lib as we continue on with the
assignments this is a good time to ref
familiarize yourself with those okay
sensors uh Motors to follow graduate
students you're moving on to uh neurons
and
synapses uh when you finish assignment 8
you are going to close the sense think
act cycle which we've talked about a few
times already we will mention it many
more times
in this course information comes in to
your robot neurons and synapses as we
saw when we talked about uh artificial
neural networks last week transform
values arriving at in our case the
sensor neuron layer the first layer of
the neural network your sensors your
neurons and synapses are going to
transform that sensory information and
possibly combine it with memory that
your robot already has and those
transformed incoming values are going to
be sent to the motors Motors apply Force
which in our case is going to be torque
or rotational
Force the values arriving at the motor
neurons are going to apply rotational
Force to the joints and the joints are
going to try and rotate links relative
to one another so for grad students when
you're finishing a assignment 8 you're
closing this Loop that connects all of
these pieces together in the physics
engine which we're going to talk about
we're going to spend quite a bit of time
talking about physics engines today time
passes in discreete chunks as you've
already seen in assignment one and two
at each time step of the simulation
values arrive at the robot's sensors
those values travel through the robot's
neural network those values arrive at
the motors the motors apply forces at
the joints to the
links which cause the links to change
their positions and accelerations at the
next time step and your robot starts to
make small movements from one time step
to the next make sense that's my best
attempt to try and summarize all these
bits and pieces of things we've talked
about so far in this course course all
good okay I want to come back to joints
for a moment um there was a little bit
that was confusing in there the first
and most confusing thing about joints
and links in pybullet the physics engine
that we're using is the juggling of
absolute and relative coordinates if
you're still confused about absolute and
relative coordinates come and see the TA
and myself and we can walk you through
that the other confusing element about
joints is joint normals and we talked
about this last time if we've got this
link and this link attached by this
joint at the moment the code base you're
using sets The Joint normal for you by
default to a particular direction The
Joint normal is a vector and for every
Vector in three-dimensional space there
is one and only two-dimensional plane
that is normal to that 3D Vector yeah so
if you set up all your links and joints
correctly what you should see is that
the links in your simulation rotate
through the vertical plane relative to
one another right so you've got this
three uh this three link robot main body
front leg back leg you should see these
three objects rotating relative to one
another through the vertical plane that
cuts through your
robot okay some of you may see something
different which is instead of this
happening and I can't demonstrate this
with my upper and lower arm let me do it
with my hand and my lower arm you might
see this happening meaning that the
objects seem to be rotating about the
long Axis or the the plane that cuts
through these robots that's not what
we're looking for if you see that what
that means is that when you set up your
robot like this you actually set it up
like this there are two horizontal axes
in pi bullet X and Y you're supposed to
be building along x and z if you build
it along Y and Z so you've got your
robot like this remember that the joint
normals are set automatically by pie
bullet so if you build objects like this
The Joint normal is still set by default
by in pi bullet like this and you're
going to see things rotating about this
joint normal so if you see objects
twisting about one another or rolling
around about one another go back and
swap the two
horizontal
coordinates make sense okay if you are
seeing that and my explanation still
didn't make sense to you come and see
the TA and myself and we'll sort
everything
out any other questions about the
assignment so far links joints sensors
Motors all good okay all right so back
to lecture uh just to remind you we're
working our way through this second
theme of the course the tools of the
trade what are all the bits and pieces
that go into a basic evolutionary
robotics experiment we saw last week how
neurons and synapses transform incoming
sensory information for a robot into
action we almost finished lecture five
last time we'll finish it uh shortly
which is how do we wrap a search process
in our case an evolutionary algorithm
around a robot controlled by a neural
network such that that evolutionary
algorithm is tinkering with the internal
bits of the neural controller of the
robot such that the evolutionary
algorithm finds a particular setting of
synaptic weights that causes our robot
to do whatever we want it to do we'll
finish that in a moment and then we'll
push on to lecture six physical
simulation you've already already been
doing a little bit of work with physics
engin a lot of what's going on is
actually hidden from you we're going to
look under the hood of the physics
engine today to see what's going on okay
so back to evolutionary algorithms very
quickly to remind you when we look out
at biological evolution if we squint an
approximate by huge orders of magnitude
you can view what's going on out there
in nature as an algorithm we have a
population of diverse things that
diversity causes some of them to not
survive long enough to produce
Offspring other aspects of diversity
allow some members of the population to
survive and produce randomly modified
copies of themselves that very very
short and crude description of
biological evolution also describes more
or less pretty much every evolutionary
algorithm that's out there and there are
hundreds of if not thousands of
different kinds of evolutionary
algorithms reported in the literature
last time we did a very quick crash
course of visiting some of the most
famous of them in order to understand
the pros and cons of those different
evolutionary algorithms that we looked
at we introduced this uh intuition pump
or this thought experiment which helps
us think about what these evolutionary
algorithms are doing which is the
fitness landscape we introduced a very
important distinction last time between
genotype and phenotype genotype is some
sort of information storage and
phenotype is a read out of that
information and an instantiation of that
information it becomes the thing the
form and function of the organism or in
this course the form and function of the
robot yeah okay we looked at this
progression of evolutionary algorithms
by looking at uh by starting with the
arguably the simplest one the hill
climber you can cat up a hill climber in
about five or six lines of python code
and you're going to do exactly that in
assignment
nine drawback of Simplicity is it's a
weak search method weak in what sense
what's wrong with the hill
climber it'll local it gets stuck on
local Optima right so we looked at the
parallel hill climber in order not to
get stuck on Hills why don't we airdrop
a whole bunch of different points at
random horizontal positions in the
fitness landscape and they all act as
hill climbers it helps but it doesn't
guarantee that we're going to find the
global Optimum actually no evolutionary
algorithm guarantees that we're going to
find the global Optimum we just try and
do a better increase that probability as
best we can we looked at the genetic
algorithm which is arguably the most
famous evolutionary algorithm out there
so famous in fact that often the field
of evolutionary algorithms is referred
to as genetic algorithms so if you hear
these two terms sometimes they're
confused it's important for us to
remember genetic algorithms are just one
type of evolutionary algorithm what does
the genetic algorithm have over parallel
hill climbers it introduces sex we now
can genetically recombine genetic
material from two parents that also
reduces the probability that we're going
to get stuck on a local Optimum during
search we looked at the evolution
strategy last time which accelerates or
decelerates horizontal jumps so as
evolution is searching we can act The
evolutionary process can figure out how
quickly or how slowly to move in
different parts of the fitness landscape
if you are climbing mountains in heavy
fog if you are in a particular part of
the mountain range that looks like this
you want to take small steps
horizontally or you're going to find
yourself in TR trouble if you find
yourself on very gradual slopes you can
speed up and take bigger steps that's
the intuition underlying the evolution
strategy we ended last time with genetic
programming genetic programming is yet a
different type of evolutionary
algorithms but we started by talking
about the problem that made genetic
programming famous the problem that
genetic programming was originally
invented to solve that problem is
symbolic regression we have a bunch of
observations and we want to search over
the space of all possible
equations that best describe the
relationship in that data
set uh we motivated this by looking at
an actual real world problem that is
near and dear to the hearts of anyone
that lives in chitan county or
thereabouts
okay we ended with this slide I
apologize we went a little quickly last
time through this we just talked about
the genotype to phenotype distinction
the genotype is some data structure that
stores information about the phenotype
in our case the robot in the case of
genetic programming the phenotype is
going to be the behavior of the
equation the genotype is going to be
encoded not in a vector of numbers which
is what we usually see in an
evolutionary algorithm in genetic
programming what makes genetic
programming unique is the genotype is
stored as a tree data structure there
are some non-computer scientists in this
class some of you have might might not
have come across tree data structures
before so we've got a cartoon example of
how this works we're going to start by
building up a population of random
candidate solution to our problem like
we usually do in an evolutionary
algorithm each individual in that
population or here are two different
individuals in that population we're
going to build them at random by
reaching into a bag that contains all of
the operations that we think should be
in the equation but we don't really know
how and all of the state variables
nitrogen phosphorus turbidity in the
Water of Lake Champlain whatever the
actual independent variables are the
things that we can measure we want to
throw them into the bag as well and some
random floating Point numbers that are
going to be sort of the raw material
that genetic programming uses to build
and then evolve these equations we ended
last time by randomly building parent
one the first individual in the
population by repeatedly re reaching
into this bag and grabbing at random
operations or operands and as we saw
last time we build up this particular
tree which represents what
equation so
0. 0.8 plus X
yes times 1.4 so this tree is encoding
an equation and the way to read this
equation is to start at the top or the
root of the tree and start walking down
the left hand side of that tree until we
get to the end 0.8 and then retracing
our steps 0.8 plus X keep walking up
times 1.4 here's a second random
equation in the population which again
was constructed at random by repeatedly
reaching into the bag of operations and
operands in this case we randomly
grabbed a division
division requires two uh two arguments
so we kept reaching in the bag and we
made this equation which
is mentally walk or Traverse through
this tree and you should be able to
construct this equation in your
head absolutely so to write this out for
us this tree is encoding this equation
this tree is encoding
this equation here
yeah okay all right
so once we have these equations we can
plug in our values for x and y in this
case which is going to give us
back a curve and we can see how closely
that curve matches our operation uh our
actual observations which are shown by
the scatter plot and I went I went
through this cartoon last time we can
see that this particular equation does a
particularly poor job at matching the
observations so it would be assigned to
low Fitness and would probably be
deleted from the population this
particular equation over here actually
does a relatively good job of explaining
or matching all the scatter points it's
got low error or high Fitness it's
likely to survive in the population and
produce randomly modified copies of
itself equation child equations that
look similar to
itself question um why would you want to
do this over like just normal like
machine learning like where you're you
know using networ to find Nar function
is it about like predictability or like
prediction
versability of the actual equation you
get back out that's exactly the reason
why so the question was why not just use
a neural network to learn the
relationship between in this example
here X and Y and the dependent variable
Z the reason why is of course a neural
network can do a fantastic job of doing
that if you want insight into actually
why algae is blooming at particular
points in the lake hard to get a neural
network to tell you why not impossible
this is pro arguably the most active
area of machine learning research is get
a neural network to learn the
relationship ship and be able to explain
it back to us poor human beings genetic
programming was invented back in the
1990s for exactly this reason is that
assuming you know how to read equations
the equation should in theory give you
insight into the problem if you remember
your high school algebra well enough you
should be able to look at this equation
not the graph and know which value of x
will minimize why you know what kind of
conditions in the lake for example are
most likely to lead to an algal bloom
that's important actionable information
yeah this is not a class on machine
learning or interpretable machine
learning it's a great Point that's why
it was
invented okay so uh in genetic
programming uh we introduce mutation so
let's assume that these these two
individuals in the population did a
relatively good job at matching our
observations better than other random
equations in the population those other
equations are killed off these two
survive and we're going to allow these
equations to produce child
equations we want to produce randomly
modified copies of them so we could take
one or the other let's take P1 for
example and start copying that tree into
a new tree and as we go every once in a
while when we're copying one particular
node like this node for example we're
going to introduce a mutation we snip
out this node and now we have a dangling
Arrow what do you think we do at this
point we're going to try and put some
new random equation material where 1.4
used to
be how do we simulate mutation do you
think in genetic programming given what
I've told you about GP so
far um are you going to put in a new
node with like a new constant value I
guess you're not going to put on like a
whole new Branch it's a great point so
we could say well there was a constant
value here before 1.4 so let's just
tweak that value 1.5 1.21 could do that
which is probably a good idea it's
making a slight change to the
genotype to the genetic encoding of the
equation or we could just throw 1.4
again and reach in start reaching into
the bag and make a whole new tree your
observation that you probably don't want
to do that is a good observation why
might you not want to do
that um if you are to like if you are to
add like large l number of like a three
or more Branch nodes a whole new
operation then that could like greatly
decrease the um evolutionary like value
especially because like it would be hard
to figure out whether just removing that
constant or if one of those two
variables um caused it to like really
decrease in um like evolutionary value
absolutely great point so if we were to
make a large change to the genotype at
this point we're making we're adding
quite a bit of new material or changing
things quite a bit remember that P1 is a
Survivor it survived in the population
compared to the other ones that didn't
do as good a job at explaining all our
observations so if you have a partly
working machine you probably don't want
to go in with a sledgehammer and start
making big changes to that partly
working machine because you're most
likely to break it right it would be
better to go in with tweezers and make a
very small change this rule about the
magnitude of mutation how much you
change a child relative to its parent is
inversely
proportional to the likelihood you're
going to make a beneficial
change said even simp more simply the
bigger the change the more likely it's
going to break things yeah okay great
point we're not going to go into that
too much this is not a class on
evolutionary algorithms but good
observation so we can introduce
mutations when we're copying uh
equations by every once in a while when
we're visiting a node tweak it a little
bit or delete it added some new genetic
material and hope for the best in
genetic programming we can also simulate
sexual recombination in addition to
mutation let's see how that
works uh I've set this up for you
already by introducing these two parent
equations which we're assuming have
survived uh up to this point in the uh
in the population and these two parents
were going to take genetic material from
these two parents and recombine them to
create two child equations down
here you can see that we've randomly
chosen
this point in parent one and we've
chosen this point at random in parent 2
we take those two sub trees and we pull
them off of their
parents we copy all the black material
into C1 and C2 so C1 is inheriting this
genetic material from its first parent
and this child is inheriting this
genetic material from its parent we're
going to take these two detached pieces
of genetic material these two pieces of
genome and swap them this piece from
parent one gets placed here on child two
this piece of genetic material from
parent 2 is placed here on child one you
don't need to madly copy down all of
this you should be able from this
description to do it at your Leisure
what I want you to see here and I
apologize that it's at the bottom of the
screen here let me pop out for a
minute what you should be able to see
down here if I can get rid of my I'll
ignore my speaker notes here you can see
down here that the equation for C1 looks
similar to but is not identical to
parent one and the child equation C2
looks similar to but is not identical to
parent
one question um if this like drastically
decreases the accuracy of the functions
would you
um like go back to the previous version
of both of the functions and then tune
it even less okay that's a great
question so let's continue this
hypothetical example we have these two
parents that survive up to this point in
The evolutionary algorithm at this in
this new generation they've just spawned
two new children C1 and C2 so in this
population at this new generation there
are four individuals P1 P2 C1 C2 and
some other equations we've made some
pretty big changes to C1 and C2 and as
you just mentioned and as we just
discussed that means the likelihood that
C1 and C2 are going to do as good a job
as P1 and P2 at explaining the data or
even do a better job that probability is
pretty low C1 and C2 are probably going
to be assigned very low Fitness values
because they're probably going to suffer
High error what do you think genetic the
genetic programming algorithm is going
to do at that point at the Next
Generation that's it right right we're
back to P1 and P2 they keep generating
C1 and C2 as you pointed out P1 and P2
might have to stick around for quite a
while until they eventually produce
children that are as good if not better
than themselves there is there are
hundreds of papers that have been
published about how to ensure that this
big genetic change is constrained so
that it has less of an impact on C1 and
C2 it's very similar
actually in spirit to our discussion
about Evolution strategies where
evolutionary Evolution strategies were
designed to make sure that individuals
move horizontally a small distance
relative to their
parent remember that in a fitness
landscape horizontal distance represents
the genetic distance you are away from
another individual it's a non-trivial
thing to constrain genetic programming
to do that it's a great question if
people are interested email me and I'll
I'll email you back some papers and you
can dig into that
literature okay we're going to push on
so we can talk about physics engines
today uh here's a fun example of genetic
programming up till now we've been
talking about genetic programming
evolving equations one of the nice
things about encoding genotypes as trees
rather than vectors as the is these
trees can grow bigger
smaller have different shapes you can
encode more or less genetic information
and that genetic information that's
encoded in the tree doesn't necessarily
have to be an equation here's an example
of genetic programming that is not
encoding uh it's not encoding in
equations what I'm showing you is the
phenotype the thing that's produced by
each genotype in this evolving
population of genotypes in this
particular application of genetic
programming as you can see the phenotype
are little
pictures what do you think the genotypes
are how is genetic programming encoding
these
pictures in a
tree there's some Clues embedded in the
way that genetic programming is going to
evolve images
here
any ideas n maybe it's subdividing
triangles subdividing triangles that's
one
idea let's have a video Let's watch it
in
action okay I don't think we need the
fancy music here we go you're watching
uh if you can read this you can see
Generations elapsing up here so we're
watching One run of genetic programming
and at every frame in this video you're
seeing the best tree in the population
at that
time you're seeing actually the
phenotype produced by the best tree in
the population at that time how do you
think these trees are encoding this
phenotype or these
phenotypes
um possibly for like the reward function
it could go
like pixel by pixel or it could like um
Define certain sub regions and
see um how close it is to this original
image um and then can I just pause you
for one moment so what you just
described is great it's the fitness
function remember we always compute fit
on the phenotype so we have a phenotype
on the right hand side of this image we
take that phenotype and we overlay it on
the actual image of the monol Lisa and
we look at the differences in colors
between Pairs of lined up pixels and the
sum of those differences is the fitness
the closer the match the higher the
fitness of that phenotype sorry you were
saying um and does it also like
maybe have like each generation make
like a hundred random triangles at these
different um these different like X and
Y
positions maybe like vectorizing them
and like it sees which of those has the
greatest Fitness and it takes that one
and just adds triangles every single
generation close remember there's
nothing here except mutation and
recombination so we've just got
300 trees in the population each tree
produces its own
image other ideas where the
triang I'm trying to decide
where parent child structure
is it's hard it's it's a little hard to
see from this I would invite you to go
and watch the video on your own screen
what it's actually doing this tree is
encoding in a whole bunch of sub trees
polygons not quite triangles but close
enough so a sub tree has a whole bunch
of nodes inside of it those nodes uh in
that subtree correspond to each point in
the polygon and that each individual
node encodes two numbers the
two-dimensional coordinate of that node
of the polygon so if we have a tree
that's made up of 13 subtrees
that genotype is encoding 13
polygons as you can probably guess from
this uh
video each of those subtes also contains
a little bit of additional information
aside from just the positions of the
nodes which is color color and Alpha
value Alpha value what's Alpha value for
those that don't know Alpha values like
transparency the amount of transparency
absolutely right so you can see that an
individual tree with uh a whole bunch of
different sub trees can put a whole
bunch of different polygons on top of
one another it can color them
differently increase or decrease the
transparency add or remove nodes to a
polygon and relatively quickly come up
with a pretty good approximation of the
Mona
Lisa why would you do such a
thing the answer is obvious no because
it's
fun okay one other observation from this
is in a relatively short period of time
you get a pretty good approximation of
the Mona Lisa if you take that tree
which encodes all those polygons that
approximates the monolisa and you apply
a compression algorithm to it you take
that same compression algorithm and
apply it to this what do you think
happens the tree value is probably going
to be smaller or the tree space smaller
the tree is actually more compressible
it's not the most efficient way to do it
but you this is a way to actually come
up with a compressible description of
the Mona Lisa okay for our purposes it's
just meant to be a visual A visual
representation of how genetic
programming is working okay that
concludes our discussion about
evolutionary algorithms any questions
before we push on all right shifting
mental gears here we go we're going to
talk about physics engines the things
that you're going to use to simulate uh
each individual robot that your
evolutionary algorithm dreams of let's
go back to the 1980s when computer
Graphics was just getting off the ground
how was computer Graphics done in those
days if you wanted to make a 2d or 3D
representation uh of a physical scene
you would do it as follows
as the computer Graphics programmer you
would manually uh figure out and then
Define in your code the position of all
of the objects that make up your
three-dimensional scene the orientation
of those objects how are they orientated
in three-dimensional space the shape and
so on then you'd click render and your
computer would more or less take a
snapshot of that 3D screen save it that
3D scene save it to a file you would
then go back in change the position and
orientation of the objects that make up
the scene click render again it would
save out a file and if you wanted to
simulate for example a single
sphere uh accelerating towards the
ground it took a fair bit of work to do
as you can imagine it didn't take very
long for computer Graphics researchers
to get pretty Fed Up of this approach
and try and dream up something easier
which is instead of manually defining
all of the
traits all of the features of every
object in your scene let the computer do
it for you the moment that was done
physics engines were born so let's
contrast a very simple physical
simulator to a computer Graphics program
in a physics engine as you've already
done you have to start at the beginning
you have to do some work up front you
still have to Define the initial
position of objects that make up the
scene you have to define the orientation
of those objects you have to define the
shape and then you have to do some
additional work that you didn't actually
have to do in computer Graphics which is
also Define the physical properties of
these objects the mass of the object the
friction of the object what happens if
of if the surface if the surface of this
object comes into contact with the
surface of another object going to do a
fair bit of work up
front you have to Define how these
objects are attached together and so on
that's what you're doing in assignments
one two and
three once you've done all that work you
can then recoup all that effort by
instead of having to click render and
redefine all those values for the next
time step of the simulation the
simulation will now take over and update
the positions update the positions and
orientations of all of the objects for
you how a physics engine does that is
actually fantastically complicated but
at heart there is one important equation
that takes care of most of this which is
hopefully something that's familiar to
most of you
FAL
ma a is acceleration um and in our case
we're going to be working in a
three-dimensional virtual environment so
acceleration is going to be a
three-dimensional Vector again remember
your high school uh physics class
perhaps where acceleration represents
the speed the rate of change of speed in
the horizontal Direction the y direction
and the Z Z Direction yeah that's linear
acceleration there is also the rate of
change in the speed of the change of the
orientation of the object this is
usually known as a yaah pitch and roll
let's see if I can do this right so I'm
an airplane this is roll pitch is my
nose goes up my nose goes down which
leaves ya which is I rotate about the
axis sticking out out from under me uh
from above me yeah so that's rotational
acceleration so we need three numbers to
tell us how the X Y and Z uh velocity of
the object is changing we need an
additional three numbers which is how
the I won't act it out how the yaw pitch
and roll velocities are also changing so
in a physics engine at every time step
that physics engine is Computing all of
the forces that are acting on every
object and we'll come back to forces in
a moment and the physics engine knows
the masses of the objects you've defined
those masses for it the physics engine
can rearrange this equation into AAL F /
by m so the physics engine takes all the
forces and the masses of the objects and
work works out these six numbers what
are what is the change in the positions
of the position of the object and what
is the change in its
orientation this is a physics engine in
a nutshell if I've lost you at this
point let me know so far so good okay
all right so that's acceleration for our
purposes you can think of this as six
numbers uh masses are scalers for the
moment we're just assigning a number
this object weighs 3 kilograms this one
measures U uh has is 30 kilograms and so
on force is also made up of six numbers
here's my object we mentioned torque
already torque is rotational Force so at
every time Step at every time step the
physics engine visits each object that
makes up your scene and looks to see
which forces are acting on that object
in this simple example here there is one
and only one force acting on the object
which is I can see some of you mouting
it it's gravity right so gravity is
pulling on this object and altering its
linear acceleration it's pulling it down
the Z coordinate of linear acceleration
is going to be NE negative at each time
step due to gravity pulling it down yeah
so what does that do as we go from one
time step to the next at time step T the
object we that we started at we place
the object at this position at time step
t + 1 the physics engine has run FAL Ma
and figured out that the linear
acceleration downwards is
positive the physics engine takes that
acceleration
and applies it to the the old position
of the object to come up with the new
position of the object which is downward
by a little bit Yeah okay at the next
time step it does the same thing and the
same thing and the the position of this
object changes changes changes until it
hits the ground and it stops moving why
why does the object stop moving from the
physics engine's point of
view suddenly there's
absolutely so the physics engine is
going to detect that two objects have
come into contact with one another at
time step t plus n and now the physics
engine is going to add two forces to
that object one force pulling the object
down which is gravity and then the
physics engine again you don't see any
of this is going to add an additional
Force pushing up against the object with
equal magnitude
you plug those two opposing forces in to
this equation what do you get back as
a they cancel out and this thing
suddenly decelerates and comes to a stop
resting on the ground yeah most of
everything that's going on in a physics
engine is Computing f equals ma over and
over and over again so far so good
okay uh what we're going to do now in
the next few slides is actually look at
some pseudo code you don't need to
remember any of this pseudo code um some
of you that are paying attention see
that there are semicolons here which is
a reminder to some of you that you're
now not looking at python code you're
looking at C code when I started this
course we were working with the open
Dynamics engine physics engine rather
than Pi bullet uh open the open Dynamics
engine is written in C I am not going to
torture any of you by having to write
physics engine code in C be thankful
you're taking this class in
2024 but I put it up here as a reminder
of one of the main Concepts in this
course which is tools come and go but
basic concepts remain yeah so lots of
different physics engines they're all
doing more or less the same thing so
let's have a look at the preliminary so
in od and in pi bullet as we mentioned
you need to do some work up front in od
there were a couple of lines uh of code
that would set up the virtual world um
that would set the gravitational force
in this world you can set it to minus
9.8 if you want to simulate things that
are happening on this planet you can set
it to different values if you're
prototyping a Rover for NASA that's
going to send your probe to planetary
bodies that have a different
gravitational force you can also set
uh different parameters that have to do
with friction for all the objects in the
world uh and so on we're not going to
talk about uh these other preliminaries
first this just a reminder we can tune
the physics of the physics engine up
front if we want
okay we then have to create a whole
bunch of links that are the physical
objects in our physics engine in od they
were not called links they're called uh
bodies we need to do a few things for
each body or link that we add to our
physics engine you've already done this
like for example setting the position
initial position of the object in od the
second coordinate was the height
coordinate in pi bullet the third
coordinate is the vertical coordinate
right I still confuse myself about this
one okay all right so as we can see here
in this cartoon example we're starting
by setting an object six meters above
the ground you'll notice when we set the
position there are no units associated
with uh these uh quantities units is
kind of hidden from you by the physics
engine so again in this course we're not
going to worry about whether this is
this object is initially placed 6 meters
above the ground 6 feet above the ground
six microns above the ground doesn't
really matter for our
purposes okay in od you also you could
set the mass of the object which is
usually just one number in od you could
distribute that mass across the length
width and height of the object so you
could actually make interesting Mass
distributions inside an object maybe you
want to simulate an object in which
inside that object there's one heavy
component on inside one part of the
object it's a detail it's not important
uh for us okay some other parameters
that we're not going to worry about so
we're setting position and mass of the
object we can also set the or the 3D
initial 3D orientation of objects uh in
uh in your scene this is a little
complicated so uh in pybullet and
pyrosim I've hidden this detail from you
when you create a cube uh in uh pyro Sim
it's placed with a particular
orientation you cannot at the outset set
the orientation to be something
different in your uh simulation if you
find you want to do that or you have to
do that when you get to your final
project here's a link to tips and tricks
which are at the end of all of the
learning modules in our subreddit so
there's additional things you can do I
want to just talk through how you how
you do this in general
just to again give you a sense of what's
going on under the hood of a physics
engine let's imagine we have a
rectangular solid like you see here and
we want to try and set its orientation
in space there are a lot of different
ways to do this some of these are more
complicated than others some of you may
have heard of querian before we're not
going to go into too much detail about
them here um but I'm going to give you
an intuition for how this works
if we have a rectangular solid we can
take three of those numbers to Divi
Define a a vector in three-dimensional
space we can tell the physics engine to
take that rectangular solid find its
longest length so if it's got different
length width and height find the longest
one which is the long axis of the
rectangular solid and place it so that
that long axis is lying along that 3D
Vector so far so
good the fourth Vector as you can
probably guess from the fact that we're
using Theta Theta is a rotational
directive it tells us then how to take
that object and rotate it about its long
axis which is lying along this three
dimensional
axis so far so good with those four
numbers you can Define any
three-dimensional orientation for our
object why is that important remember
that in uh f equals ma what your physics
engine is doing is summing up all of the
forces and torqus that are acting on
your object we've got three numbers for
force which is how much uh how much that
force is pushing or pulling
on the linear acceleration of the object
torque is a rotational Force which is
trying to alter the rotational
acceleration of your object so at every
point in time the physics engine is
updating not just the position of your
object but also its orientation in
three-dimensional space if for some
reason you need to set the orientation
yourself at the beginning you would
normally do it with
quance so far so
good okay we saw an example of
gravitational force which is an example
of a linear force acting on objects in
your physics engine what kinds of torqus
are acting on your links what are the
what are the what are the rotational
forces that cause the orientation of
your links to change from one time step
to the next in your physics
absolutely a motor attached to a joint a
motor attached to a joint is applying
rotational force is applying torque to
try and alter the three dimensional
orientation of the pairs of objects that
are attached by The Joint so if there
are links if there are links that are
connected by a joint that link may be
acted on by a linear Force for like
gravity that's trying to pull it down
and torqus the physics engine is summing
up all of those linear and rotational
forces to compute the new linear
acceleration and rotational acceleration
acting on each object the physics engine
finishes that time step by using the
linear and rotational acceleration to
compute the new position and the new
orientation of each object question
I was just going to say that the weight
of the connected link is
also the weight of the connected link
absolutely can be uh actually can be a
torque absolutely in this physics engine
we're assuming that links are massless
they're invisible they have no Mass the
only thing that have masses are links
sensors and motors and joints in the
physics engine you're using pi bullet
have no Mass if you want to approximate
if you want to make a more physically
realistic robot you could put a link
sitting right here and connect this link
to this link and then connect this link
to this link to better simulate a
motorized joint in a
robot okay any questions about that so
far okay we need four numbers if we want
to specify the three-dimensional
orientation of an object in a physics
engine if we've got a cylinder
we only need three numbers
why yep yes rot doesn't matter the
rotation doesn't matter right so if you
look at my pen obviously three of the
numbers matter I need to set the yaw
pitch and roll of this object but once I
set it this fourth number in a querian
Theta if I apply different thetas
assuming there's no actual complex
pattern on the surface of the cylinder
it doesn't
matter how many numbers do I need to
specify the orientation of a sphere in a
physics
engine in the red hoodie in the back
there orientation the the orientation I
want to set the orientation of the
sphere zero zero I don't need any it
doesn't matter for a sphere I set the
three-dimensional position and we're
done right it doesn't actually matter
assuming again the surface is uniform it
doesn't matter how we rotate it in space
now a physics engine absolutely will
apply torqus and uh rotational linear
forces to a sphere and cause it to
rotate as it's moving through 3D space
in a physics engine it's not really
going to have much of an impact on the
physics how would that be effective if
you started adding joints to your links
it get very complicated very quickly
right on a specific part of it right and
so then the orientation would matter yes
absolutely so let's go back to my arm as
an example we've got this link attached
to this link by a rotational joint and
let's say I set this is the initial
position and orientation and this is the
initial position and orientation of
these two links I set them before I
start the simulation running once the
SIM imation starts
running torqus and forces start to act
and the positions and
orientations of these two objects start
to change I'm applying rotational Force
to these two objects and I'm also
counteracting the linear force of
gravity that's pulling them down if you
look at my lower arm you can see that
the linear acceleration and rotational
acceler ceration of this object is
changing in complicated ways it's very
very very very difficult to work these
all out by hand that's why physics
engines were invented you don't need to
okay so each link still has four values
for orientation you just only need like
three to set for a absolutely great
point every object regardless of its
shape has three numbers specifying its
position in space it's got four numbers
specifying its orientation in space it
also has three numbers representing how
quickly or how slowly it's moving
through space and it has another three
numbers specifying how quickly and how
slowly it's rotating through space all
of those numbers change at every or can
change at every instant in time in a
physics engine and all of those numbers
are hidden from you
unless you need those numbers which
we're going to see in a moment there are
cases in which you do so far so good
okay let's keep
going okay uh we've actually already
talked about this so hopefully this is
going to be a little bit uh familiar and
a reinforcement for you again we're
looking at C code from a different
physics engine so you can ignore a lot
of the actual details here what I want
you to pay attention to is the fact that
we're now creating a joint
which connects together two different
objects in this case we are attaching a
particular type of a joint called a
hinge joint which are the kinds of
joints we're going to be using in this
class they affect how objects rotate
relative to one another we talked about
setting the position of the joint in od
the position of a joint is called its
anchor and the three-dimensional
position of a joint also starts to move
once the physics engine starts running
you have to set the position of that
joint at the beginning of the simulation
and then the physics engine does
everything from there yeah it is an
invisible massless extensionless object
meaning it has no orientation just
position in
space you then also have to set the axis
otherwise known as The Joint normal
which we already talked about uh in this
class we just talked about how this is
set manually and hidden from you most of
the time this makes your life easier
unless you do something differently
which then causes your robot to act
mysteriously if you want to unlock joint
normals and play around with them you
can jump ahead to learning module n in
the subreddit and give it a try this was
my best attempt to try and draw in
three-dimensional space two objects with
a vertical joint normal which causes
these two objects to rotate about x and
z yeah just as a reminder if I have
these two objects and I Define this
joint normal there is one 2D plane that
is normal to this 3D Vector I apologize
for repeating this several times but
it's worthwhile getting the straight in
your head before your robot gets more
complicated with lots more links and
joints and relative and absolute
coordinates okay all right the one
aspect of a physics engine one of the
big parts of a physics engine that we
have not talked about until now is uh
detecting and resolving collisions so
collisions in a physics engine there are
two parts that the physics engine needs
to deal with detecting collisions have a
pair of objects come into contact with
one
another and resolving collisions what
should the physics engine do when it's
detected a collision okay so how does
this uh work let's actually just ignore
the the code for a moment let's assume
we make a physics engine where we've got
a whole bunch of bouncing balls none of
them are connected together with joints
so we've got in the case of Pi bullet
you would have nine links and zero
joints yeah okay they all start bouncing
around and hitting the ground and maybe
a few of few of these spheres might come
close together and actually come into
contact with one another how does the
physics engine detect this and how does
it deal with this if these nine links
happen to be spheres it's super simple
how does the physics engine know when
two spheres have come into contact with
one
another
close absolutely so we've got it's going
to the physics engine is going to look
at pairs of spheres and as you said the
physics engine knows the XYZ for this
sphere and the XYZ for this sphere how
does it know whether they those spheres
have collided or
not
ruses
maximum absolutely right so we have
these two spheres we know the radi of
these two spheres because the user
specified the user specified uh the the
size of those object the size of that
object at the beginning of the
simulation so we sum those two rate so
if we've got this position and this
position and we sum those two rate if
that sum if the I'm sorry I take that
back if we take we take the distance
between the centers of the two objects
and if that distance between these two
centers is less than the sum of the two
radii these objects have collided and
are possibly interpenetrating one
another already it's a big no no in a
physics engine physics engine doesn't
like that very much much so far so good
okay so in order to do that in the this
case of nine uh nine spheres how many
potential collisions does the physics
engine need to look
for it knows the positions and radi of
all nine of these spheres at this
particular point in the physical
simulation
two two to the 9 that's one
guess would it
be eight or n factorial eight or nine
factorial any other guesses how do we
how do we get to these equations well
let's put ourselves in the shoes of the
physics
engine deep breath pick one of the nine
and compare the position of this against
each of the other eight spheres and
detect whether or not the sphere is in
contact with any of these eight okay so
that's eight collisions we've just
considered let's go to the second of the
nine
spheres how many Collision potential
collisions do we need to detect in this
case or consider seven right one of them
we've already done if object I is in
contact with object J by definition
object J is already is also in contact
with object a so you mentioned factorial
right we need to consider eight then
seven then six then five then four then
three then two then one potential
collisions which is how
many okay we've got n objects and we
need to consider its potential collision
with every other one of the N minus one
objects but because of the
Symmetry we can get away with doing half
as many if we've got nine spheres in our
simulation how many collisions are we
talking
about
3 36 okay at every time step in this
particular simulation the physics engine
needs to consider 36 possible
collisions rewind your mental tape to
when you were creating these towers I
forget how many links were involved in
that does anybody
remember
50 there were 25 Towers each Tower was
made up
of 25 towers and how many
sorry so there were 250 links in that
physical simulation at every time step
when that simulation was running on your
laptop how many collisions was Pi bullet
considering can see the eyes rolling
back into your head for some of you
right it's it's a big
number yeah
how many of you started to hear the fan
going on on your laptop when you
simulated those 25 uh Towers this this
is why so again some of these details
are not that important for us but it's
good to really know what's going on
under the hood when you run a physics
engine the vast majority of work that
that physics engine is doing is
detecting potential collisions it's
super complicated to do if we've got
spheres as we just said it's relatively
easy the algorithm is running a
relatively the physics engine is running
a relatively simple algorithm to detect
for each of those potential collisions
whether a collision is happening or not
what about two cubes if we replace these
nine spheres with nine cubes we still
have to detect or the physics engine
still needs to look for this many
potential pairwise
collisions how is the physics engine
determining whether two cubes are in
contact with one another or
not it can I mean it can just do the
same thing as this here just with a
slightly more complicated calculation to
find the outer bound yes it is a it is a
more complicate it can't just take the
distance between the centers of those
two cubes it's more complicated and you
got to run that more complicated
algorithm this many
times now your fan is really running on
your laptop yeah th this is where this
is why physics engines took a long time
to get right and why they're so
computationally uh they they computation
they computation Hogs yeah okay so one
additional detail which again is hidden
from you um in physics engines is
something known as Collision spaces and
I kind of breezed over this uh when we
introduce the preliminaries here so
we're going to talk about Collision
space
for a
moment let's in this case we've placed
all of our nine links in one and only
one Collision space what that does we're
telling the physics engine that at every
point in time please look at all of
these potential collisions and resolve
them don't let these fears
interpenetrate one
another let's imagine a slightly more a
slightly different simulation we still
have nine links and zero joints but we
know for some reason that these objects
tend to be close to one another and
these links tend to be close to one
another and they're usually not very
close to one another maybe we're going
to simulate two robot
swarms what we can do is Define two
different Collision spaces and put these
links which tend to be close to one
another in this space and put these
objects in this second space I'm going
to stop explaining Collision spaces for
a moment and see if you can guess the
rest of the intuition behind Collision
spaces why are we doing this you can
reduce the number of collision
calculations if you're explicitly saying
do not calculate collision between this
of objects and other of objects
absolutely right so in the case where we
have just one Collision where we have
just one Collision space we had nine
objects * 8 / 2 which is 36 potential
collisions if we place these objects in
these two different spaces how many
collisions do it does the physics engine
now need to deal
with can we do better than
that
the physics engine can actually use
these Collision spaces to to get away
with actually most of the time doing
much less than 16 collisions
how can just be like if the distance is
too
great if the distance of what any
uh possi possibly there are other things
you can do that say when they're really
far apart I'm going to do a preliminary
calculation I'll only do a more
complicated one when they're closer so I
don't know the exact details of I know
they most use ISE based Collision y so
they'll
basically dynamically create Collision
groups based on what is with proximity
of what else and dnamic arange theary
according to that absolutely so this
tree based Collision detection that you
mentioned this is a simpler version of
it in state-of-the-art video games they
use Dynamic trees we're going to use a
static one we've created you can think
of this as a tree where we've got our
world as the root and then we've got two
sub trees which are these two
spaces at any given point in time in
this physics engine the in the in the
virtual world the physics engine is
going to look to see whether these two
cubes come into contact with one another
these two
spaces if these two spaces if these two
cubes that are wrapped around these two
groups do not come into contact with one
another what can the physics engine get
away
with 16 I'm sorry I misspoke so this
doesn't let it do less than 16 it lets
it do less than 36 so it's just at this
particular point in time it's done one
Collision detection between these two
cubes yeah assuming they these two cubes
don't Collide it's got to do each of the
pairwise collisions inside here 4 * 3 /
two and it's got to do pairwise
detection of all of the collisions in
this box for each of the five there's it
collide with any of the other four C
other four spheres in space two divided
by two that's how many collisions it
needs to
compute at the next time step imagine
these spheres and their respective
Collision spaces have moved a little bit
and now at this new time step when the
physics engine looks to see whether
space one and space two are in collision
with one another and finds that they are
collision with one another what does the
physics engine have to do
now merge the two spes
effectively it's got to merge the two
spaces and
unfortunately it's got to do all of them
yeah so there is a fantastically
complicated literature and you mention
this most in the computer graphics and
computer games communities about how to
reduce the computational burden of colle
of collision detection the most
computationally painful step that the
physics engine needs to perform during
each time
step so far so good okay we've got two
minutes left so let's finish uh let's
finish with um Collision
resolution what happens when during any
given time step the physics engine finds
that two objects actually are in
collision with one another in most
physics engines they introduce a little
bit of event based programming and again
not everyone in this class has come
across this concept
before most of the time when you write a
computer program the computer goes to
the first line of your code executes
that line goes to the next one next one
next one next one enters a loop and
marches through each line of your code
one after the other in event-based
programming sometimes as the computer is
leisurely moving from one step to the
next there's an event that happens from
somewhere outside the execution of your
code and that causes your computer to
leave whatever line in your code it's
currently executing and immediately jump
to some other part of your code to
handle that event events that are very
important in a physics engine are these
kind of events so at during a individual
time step in a physical simulation if a
pair of objects are detected to be in
collision with one another this part of
your coat the physics engines code uh
takes over and it says what do you want
me to do boss what do I do these objects
are in collision with one another you
usually have to write that code again in
this class I've written that code for
you it's going to be taken care of
automatically the first thing this code
asks is are the two bodies or in our
case the two
links that have been detected in
collision with one
another are they are they are they are
connected together by a
joint if they are what do you think the
physics engine
does it doesn't care it leaves this
piece of code that is resolving the
Collision it ignores the Collision right
that Collision is supposed to be
happening it's actually a good thing you
so there's usually a bunch of if
statements inside this part of your code
that resolves collisions that say if
it's this type of collision ignore it if
it's this type of collision ignore it so
on and so on we're out of time so we
will continue our discussion of
collision resolution uh next time you
have a quiz due tonight undergrads
you're working on uh ensors grad
students you're working on neurons and
synapses see you on Thursday